Editing A11Y chapter (#328)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2019/accessibility.md

When thinking about users with disabilities, we should remember that their user journeys are often the same—they just use different tools. These popular tools include but are not limited to: screen readers, screen magnifiers, browser or text size zooming, and voice controls.

Often, improving the accessibility of your site has benefits for everyone. While we typically think of people with disabilities as people with a permanent disability, everybody can have a temporary or situational disability. For example: someone might be permanently blind, have a temporarary eye infection, or situationally be outside on a sunny day. All of these might explain why someone is unable to see their screen. Everyone has situational disabilities, and so improving the accessibility of your web page will improve the experience of all users in any situation.

> ## State of accessibility support around the web

Author: Sounds good to me

We’ve split up our most interesting insights into four categories: Ease of reading, media on the web, ease of page navigation, and compatibility with assistive technologies.

No significant difference in accessibility was found between desktop and mobile during testing. As a result, all of our presented metrics are the result of our desktop analysis unless otherwise stated.

## Ease of reading

The primary goal of a web page is to deliver content users want to engage with. This content might be a video or an assortment of images, but many times, it’s simply the text on the page. It’s extremely important that our textual content is legible to our readers. If visitors can’t read a web page, they can’t engage with it, which ends up with them leaving. In this section we’ll look at three areas in which sites struggled.

### Color contrast

> There are many cases where visitors to your site may not be able see it perfectly. Visitors may be colorblind and unable to distinguish between the font and background color ([1 in every 12 men and 1 in 200 women](https://web.archive.org/web/20180304115406/http://www.allpsych.uni-giessen.de/karl/colbook/sharpe.pdf) of European descent). Perhaps they’re simply reading while the sun is out and creating tons of glare on their screen—significantly impairing their vision. Or maybe they’ve just grown older and their eyes can't distinguish colors as well as they used to.

Reviewer: Can we not find a better reference for that stat (or use an alternative stat?) rather than using a Wayback Machine link?

> There are many cases where visitors to your site may not be able see it perfectly. Visitors may be colorblind and unable to distinguish between the font and background color ([1 in every 12 men and 1 in 200 women](https://web.archive.org/web/20180304115406/http://www.allpsych.uni-giessen.de/karl/colbook/sharpe.pdf) of European descent). Perhaps they’re simply reading while the sun is out and creating tons of glare on their screen—significantly impairing their vision. Or maybe they’ve just grown older and their eyes can't distinguish colors as well as they used to.

Author: The PDF it links to is the research study where those numbers were discovered. Where would be a better place to upload and permalink the PDF?

> There are many cases where visitors to your site may not be able see it perfectly. Visitors may be colorblind and unable to distinguish between the font and background color ([1 in every 12 men and 1 in 200 women](https://web.archive.org/web/20180304115406/http://www.allpsych.uni-giessen.de/karl/colbook/sharpe.pdf) of European descent). Perhaps they’re simply reading while the sun is out and creating tons of glare on their screen—significantly impairing their vision. Or maybe they’ve just grown older and their eyes can't distinguish colors as well as they used to.

Reviewer: I think the fact the original site is not up makes it look potentially unreliable and not authoritative. A quick Google finds this link which looks like a better place to link from: http://www.cvrl.org/people/stockman/pubs/1999%20Genetics%20chapter%20SSJN.pdf

> There are many cases where visitors to your site may not be able see it perfectly. Visitors may be colorblind and unable to distinguish between the font and background color ([1 in every 12 men and 1 in 200 women](https://web.archive.org/web/20180304115406/http://www.allpsych.uni-giessen.de/karl/colbook/sharpe.pdf) of European descent). Perhaps they’re simply reading while the sun is out and creating tons of glare on their screen—significantly impairing their vision. Or maybe they’ve just grown older and their eyes can't distinguish colors as well as they used to.

Author: @rviscomi If we reference research like this, would it be better to serve these PDFs from the almanac itself?

> There are many cases where visitors to your site may not be able see it perfectly. Visitors may be colorblind and unable to distinguish between the font and background color ([1 in every 12 men and 1 in 200 women](https://web.archive.org/web/20180304115406/http://www.allpsych.uni-giessen.de/karl/colbook/sharpe.pdf) of European descent). Perhaps they’re simply reading while the sun is out and creating tons of glare on their screen—significantly impairing their vision. Or maybe they’ve just grown older and their eyes can't distinguish colors as well as they used to.

Reviewer 2: I think it's ok to link to the PDF directly (not on Wayback). Something something crediting the content owner?

> In order to make sure your website is readible under these conditions, making sure your text has sufficient color contrast with its background is crtical.

Author: Wow, how did I miss this. Great catch!

It is interesting to note however, that the bulk of this problem appears to be a few popular third-party stylesheets which include infinitely looping CSS animations by default.

## Media on the web

### Alternative text on images

Images are an essential part of the web experience. They can tell powerful stories, grab attention, and elicit emotion. But not everyone can see these images that we rely on to tell parts of our stories. Thankfully, in 1995, HTML 2.0 provided a solution to this problem: [the alt tag](https://webaim.org/techniques/alttext/). The alt tag provides web developers with the capability of adding a textual description to the images we use, so that when someone is unable to see our images (or the images are unable to load), they can read the alt text for a description. The alt text fills them in on the part of the story they would have otherwise missed.

Even though alt tags have been around for 25 years, 49.91% of pages still fail to provide alt tags for some of their images, and 8.68% of pages never use them at all.

### Captions for audio and video

> Just as images are powerful storytellers, so too are audio and video in grabbing attention and expressing ideas. When audio and video content is not captioned, users who cannot hear this content miss out on large portions of the web. One of the most common things we hear from users who are Deaf or hard of hearing is the need to include captions for all audio and video content.

Author: Yeah I learned about this myself while working on the chapter. Never knew there was a difference.

Of sites using [`<audio>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/audio) or [`<video>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/video) elements, only 0.54% (1 out of every 185 sites) provide captions. Note that some websites have custom solutions for providing video and audio captions to users. We were unable to detect these and thus the true percentage of sites utilizing captions is slightly higher.

> You can add captions to all video and audio content by using the [`<track>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/Audio_and_video_delivery/Adding_captions_and_subtitles_to_HTML5_video) tag.

Author: Updated

## Ease of page navigation

When you open the menu in a restaurant, the first thing you probably do is read all of the section headers: appetizers, salads, main course, and dessert. This allows you to scan a menu for all of the options and jump quickly to the dishes most interesting to you. Similarly, when a visitor opens a web page their goal is to find the information they are most interested in: the reason they came to the page in the first place. In order to help users find their desired content as fast as possible (and prevent them from hitting the back button), we try to separate the contents of our pages into several visually distinct sections. For example: a site header for navigation, various headings in our articles so users can quickly scan them, a footer for other extraneous resources, and more.

> While this is exceptionally important, we need to take care to mark up our pages so our visitors’ computers can perceive these distinct sections as well. Why? While most of us use a mouse to navigate pages, many others rely on keyboards and screen readers. These technologies rely heavily on how well their computers understand your page.

Author: @rviscomi How about `While most readers use`, instead of `While most of users use`.

"Users use" sounds odd to me.

> While this is exceptionally important, we need to take care to mark up our pages so our visitors’ computers can perceive these distinct sections as well. Why? While most of us use a mouse to navigate pages, many others rely on keyboards and screen readers. These technologies rely heavily on how well their computers understand your page.

Reviewer 2: SGTM!

> So how well are we doing? Very poorly. Only 26.03% of sites even contained the most basic part of navigation: a main landmark.

Author: For a more accurate idea I could edit the 09.02 metric. And measure how many sites markup their header, footer, navigation and footer.

This would be a more representative metric.

> So how well are we doing? Very poorly. Only 26.03% of sites even contained the most basic part of navigation: a main landmark.

Reviewer 2: It's late so let's keep the metrics as-is and try to rephrase if possible. Would you be comfortable removing this sentence? It's still discussed below but it won't be the sole metric judging the a11y space.

What was especially surprising here is 15.56% of mobile and 13.03% of desktop sites which use shortcut keys assign the same shortcut to multiple different elements. This means browsers have to guess which element should own this shortcut key.

### Tables

Tables are one of the primary ways we organize and express large amounts of data. Many assistive technologies like screen readers and switches (which may be used by users with motor disabilities) might have special features allowing them to navigate this tabular data more efficiently.

#### Headings

Depending on the way a particular table is structured, the use of table headers makes it easier to read across columns or rows without losing context on what data that particular column or row refers to. Having to navigate a table lacking in header rows or columns is a subpar experience for a screen reader user. This is because it’s hard for a screen reader user to keep track of their place in a table absent of headers, especially when the table is quite large.

> To mark up table headers, simply use the [`<th>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/th) tag (instead of [`<td>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/td)), or either of the ARIA [`columnheader`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/Table_Role) or [`rowheader`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles/Table_Role) roles. Only 24.5% of pages with tables were found to markup their tables with either of these methods. So the three quarters of pages choosing to include tables without headers are creating serious challenges for screen reader users.

Author: `thead` doesn't provide any accessibility functionality. It's main usage is for assisting with styling the table

Currently, 46.91% of pages use at least one ARIA role attribute. In Figure 9 below, we’ve compiled a list of the top ten most widely used ARIA role values.

<figure>
  <iframe aria-labelledby="fig9-caption" width="600" height="370" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vSG3DTnx7j-YT1hnQpQYjDRD-rCSF1dXbgva-iJQZKdCKIt34ojGMDRhx74fF93CpPg7oGW_C68fWGT/pubchart?oid=176877741&format=interactive"></iframe>
  <div id="fig9-caption" class="visually-hidden">Figure 9. Horizontal bar chart titled "top 10 most used ARIA roles" with bars for each role type vs percent of sites using ranging from 0 to 25 in increments of 5. Navigation: 20.4%; search: 15.49%; main: 14.39%; banner: 13.62%; contentinfo: 11.23%; button: 10.59%; dialog: 7.87%; complementary: 6.06%; menu: 4.71%; form: 3.75%</div>
  <figcaption>Figure 9. Top 10 most used ARIA roles.</figcaption>
</figure>

> Looking at the results in Figure 9, we can draw two surprising conclusions:

Reviewer 2: It's strange to see "two surprising conclusions:" followed by a heading. I thought some content was missing. Maybe  remove the heading and make it a prefix to the following paragraph?

Author: Updated in the latest commit. Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: SGTM

##### Updating UI frameworks could be the way forward for accessibility across the web

> The top 5 roles, all appearing on 11% of pages or more, are landmark roles. These are used to aid navigation—not to describe the functionality of a widget, such as a combo box. This is a surprising result because the main motivator behind the development of ARIA was to give web developers the capability to describe the functionality of widgets made of generic HTML elements (like a `<div>`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The top 5 roles, all appearing on 11% of pages or more, are landmark roles. These are used to aid navigation, not to describe the functionality of a widget, such as a combo box. This is a surprising result because the main motivator behind the development of ARIA was to give web developers the capability to describe the functionality of widgets made of generic HTML elements (like a `<div>`).
```

We suspect that some of the most popular web UI frameworks include navigation roles in their templates. This would explain the prevalence of landmark attributes. If this theory is correct, updating popular UI frameworks to include more accessibility support may have a huge impact on the accessibility of the web.

> Another result pointing towards this conclusion is the fact that more "advanced" but equally important ARIA attributes don't appear to be used at all. Such attributes cannot easily be deployed through a UI framework because they might need to be customized based on the structure and the visual appearance of every site individually. For example, we found that the posinset and setsize attributes were only used on 0.01% of websites. These attributes convey to a screen reader user how many items are in a list or menu and which item is currently selected. So, if a visually impaired user is trying to navigate through a menu, they might hear index announcements like: "Home, 1 of 5", "Products, 2 of 5", "Downloads, 3 of 5", etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another result pointing towards this conclusion is the fact that more "advanced" but equally important ARIA attributes don't appear to be used at all. Such attributes cannot easily be deployed through a UI framework because they might need to be customized based on the structure and the visual appearance of every site individually. For example, we found that the `posinset` and `setsize` attributes were only used on 0.01% of pages. These attributes convey to a screen reader user how many items are in a list or menu and which item is currently selected. So, if a visually impaired user is trying to navigate through a menu, they might hear index announcements like: "Home, 1 of 5", "Products, 2 of 5", "Downloads, 3 of 5", etc.
```

#### Labels on interactive elements

> The most common way that a interacts with a website is through its controls (such as links or buttons to navigate the website). However, many times screen reader users are unable to tell what action a control will perform once activated. Often the reason this confusion occurs is due to the lack of a textual label. For example: a button displaying a left-pointing arrow icon to signify it's the "Back" button, but containing no actual text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most common way that a user interacts with a website is through its controls, such as links or buttons to navigate the website. However, many times screen reader users are unable to tell what action a control will perform once activated. Often the reason this confusion occurs is due to the lack of a textual label. For example, a button displaying a left-pointing arrow icon to signify it's the "Back" button, but containing no actual text.
```

> In our sample, a lot of websites use buttons or links. From those, only around a quarter (24.39%) include textual labels with these controls. If a control is not labeled a screen reader user might read something generic, such as the word "button" instead of a meaningful word like "Search".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only about a quarter (24.39%) of pages that use buttons or links include textual labels with these controls. If a control is not labeled, a screen reader user might read something generic, such as the word "button" instead of a meaningful word like "Search".
```

Buttons and links are almost always included in the tab order and thus have extremely high visibility. Navigating through a website using the tab key is one of the primary ways through which users who use only the keyboard explore your website. So a user is sure to encounter your unlabeled buttons and links if they are moving through your website using the tab key.

### Accessibility of Form Controls

> Filling out forms is a task many of us do every single day. Whether we’re shopping, booking travel, or applying for a job, forms are the main way users share information with web pages. Because of this, ensuring your forms are accessible is incredibly important. The simplest means of accomplishing this is by providing labels (via the [`<label>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/label), [`aria-label`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-label_attribute) or [`aria-labelledby`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-labelledby_attribute)) for each of your inputs. Sadly, only 22.33% of pages provide labels for all their form inputs, meaning 4 out of every 5 pages have forms that may be next to impossible to fill out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filling out forms is a task many of us do every single day. Whether we’re shopping, booking travel, or applying for a job, forms are the main way users share information with web pages. Because of this, ensuring your forms are accessible is incredibly important. The simplest means of accomplishing this is by providing labels for each of your inputs. This can be accomplished via the [`<label>` element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/label), [`aria-label`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-label_attribute) attribute, or [`aria-labelledby`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-labelledby_attribute) attribute. Sadly, only 22.33% of pages provide labels for all their form inputs, meaning 4 out of every 5 pages have forms that may be next to impossible to fill out.
```

Reviewer 2: > may be next to impossible to fill out

Is this overly dramatic? Or is it true that without labels it's completely inaccessible?

Author: It may not be completely impossible, but it becomes much more difficult. You can hunt around for `<div>`s that precede the inputs and piece together what inputs are for what. But i know a lot of sites also replace labels with the `placeholder` attribute which is still not widely supported on assistive technology.

I think it's fair to at least say it'd be exceptionally difficult.

@kleinab @ljme what do you both think?

#### Indicators of required and invalid fields

> When we come across a field with a big red asterisk next to it, we know it’s a required field. Or when we hit submit and are informed there were invalid inputs, anything highlighted in a different color needs to be corrected and then resubmitted. However, people with low or no vision cannot rely on these visual cues, which is why the HTML input attributes `required`, `aria-required` and `aria-invalid` are so important. They provide screen readers with the equivalent of red asterisks and red highlighted fields. As a nice bonus, when you inform browsers what fields are required, they’ll [validate parts of your forms](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Forms/Form_validation) for you. No JavaScript required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we come across a field with a big red asterisk next to it, we know it’s a required field. Or when we hit submit and are informed there were invalid inputs, anything highlighted in a different color needs to be corrected and then resubmitted. However, people with low or no vision cannot rely on these visual cues, which is why the HTML input attributes `required`, `aria-required`, and `aria-invalid` are so important. They provide screen readers with the equivalent of red asterisks and red highlighted fields. As a nice bonus, when you inform browsers what fields are required, they’ll [validate parts of your forms](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Forms/Form_validation) for you. No JavaScript required.
```

> Of pages using forms: 21.73% use required or aria-required when marking up required fields. Only one in every five sites make use of this. This is a simple step to make your site accessible, and unlocks helpful browser features for all users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of pages using forms, 21.73% use `required` or `aria-required` when marking up required fields. Only one in every five sites make use of this. This is a simple step to make your site accessible, and unlocks helpful browser features for all users.
```

This issue is even more pronounced for screen readers because their users may not be able to visually double check what is selected. Plus, many ARIA attributes, such as [`aria-describedby`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-describedby_attribute)  and [`aria-labelledby`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Techniques/Using_the_aria-labelledby_attribute), work similarly to the label element detailed above. So to make your site accessible, removing all duplicate IDs is a good first step.

## Conclusion

People with disabilities are not the only ones with accessibility needs. For example, anyone who has suffered a temporary wrist injury has experienced the difficulty of tapping small tap targets. Eyesight often diminishes with age, making text written in small fonts challenging to read. Finger dexterity is not the same across age demographics, making tapping interactive controls or swiping through content on mobile websites more difficult for a sizable percentage of users.

> Similarly, assistive software is not only geared towards people with disabilities:

Reviewer 2: This feels like an incomplete sentence and it's unclear what the following list would contain. Consider rephrasing.

Author: Updated in the latest commit. How does it sound?

Reviewer 2: SGTM!

> - Drivers would benefit from a screen reading functionality that, while they keep their eyes on the road, reads long pieces of text like news stories aloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Drivers would benefit from a screen reading feature that, while they keep their eyes on the road, reads long pieces of text like news stories aloud.
```

> - The recent popularity of voice assistance, both on mobile devices and in the home, has demonstrated that controlling a computing device using voice commands is desirable (and essential for many users). Voice commands like these used to only be an accessibility feature but are now turning into a mainstream product.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The recent popularity of voice assistance, both on mobile devices and in the home, has demonstrated that controlling a computing device using voice commands is both desirable and essential for many users. Voice commands like these used to only be an accessibility feature but are now turning into a mainstream product.
```

- Captions are enjoyed not only by people who cannot hear a video but also by people who want to watch a video in a loud restaurant or in a library.

> Once a website is built, it’s often hard to retrofit accessibility on top of existing site structures and widgets. Accessibility isn’t something that can be easily sprinkled on afterwards, but needs to be part of the design and implementation process. Unfortunately, either through a lack of awareness or easy-to-use testing tools, many developers are not familiar with the needs of all their users and the requirements of the assistive software they use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once a website is built, it’s often hard to retrofit accessibility on top of existing site structures and widgets. Accessibility isn’t something that can be easily sprinkled on afterwards, rather it needs to be part of the design and implementation process. Unfortunately, either through a lack of awareness or easy-to-use testing tools, many developers are not familiar with the needs of all their users and the requirements of the assistive software they use.
```

> While not conclusive, our results indicate that the use of accessibility standards like ARIA, and accessibility best practices (e.g., using alt text) are found on a *sizable, but not substantial,* portion of the web. On the surface this is encouraging, but we suspect many of these positive trends are due to the popularity of certain UI frameworks. On one hand, this is disappointing because web developers cannot simply rely on UI frameworks to inject their sites with accessibility support. On the other hand though, it’s encouraging to see how large of an effect UI frameworks could have on the accessibility of the web.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While not conclusive, our results indicate that the use of accessibility standards like ARIA and accessibility best practices (e.g., using alt text) are found on a *sizable, but not substantial* portion of the web. On the surface this is encouraging, but we suspect many of these positive trends are due to the popularity of certain UI frameworks. On one hand, this is disappointing because web developers cannot simply rely on UI frameworks to inject their sites with accessibility support. On the other hand though, it’s encouraging to see how large of an effect UI frameworks could have on the accessibility of the web.
```
